docs: add node migration guide for operators (#1703)
near/mpc: docs/node-migration-guide.md

### Get the Registration Command

Run the following command to generate the NEAR CLI command for registration:

```bash
./target/release/backup-cli \
  --home-dir $BACKUP_HOME_DIR \
  register \
  --mpc-contract-account-id v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  --near-network testnet \
  --signer-account-id your-account.testnet
```

This will output a complete `near` CLI command. Example output:

```bash
Run the following command to register your backup service:

near contract call-function as-transaction \
  v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  register_backup_service \
  json-args '{"backup_service_info":{"public_key":"ed25519:AbC123..."}}' \
  prepaid-gas '300.0 Tgas' \
  attached-deposit '0 NEAR' \
  sign-as your-account.testnet \
  network-config testnet \
  sign-with-keychain \
  send
```

### Execute the Registration

Copy and run the generated command to register your backup service with the contract.

## Step 3: Generate and Set Encryption Key

Generate a 256-bit (32-byte) AES encryption key for securing keyshares during backup and restore:

```bash
# Generate a random 32-byte hex key
export BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 32)
echo "Your encryption key: $BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY"

> ```

Reviewer: @copilot can you add a note on where to find this key on a node that has been running without this environment variable? It should be in a file in the $MPC_HOME dir in that case.

Reviewer: Thank you!

## Overview

Node migration allows you to move your MPC node from one host to another without requiring a full network resharing. This is accomplished using the backup service and the `backup-cli` tool to securely backup and restore your node's keyshares.

**Important:** This guide covers the **Soft Launch** migration process. For information about the architecture and future Hard Launch implementation, see [migration-service.md](./migration-service.md).

## Prerequisites

Before starting a migration, ensure you have:

1. **An active MPC node** that is a current participant in the network
2. **A new host/machine** ready to run the migrated node
3. **The backup-cli tool** installed on a secure machine (can be your local machine or a dedicated backup server)
4. **NEAR CLI** installed for contract interactions
5. **Access to both nodes** (old and new) during the migration process

## Step 1: Setup the Backup CLI

First, you'll need to set up the backup CLI tool and generate keys for the backup service.

### Install backup-cli

Install the backup-cli tool using cargo:

```bash

> cargo install --path /path/to/mpc/repository/crates/backup-cli

Reviewer: @copilot can you write this assuming the reader is at the crate root to make this easy to copy-paste? Also add the `--locked` argument to ensure it's using the right versions of dependencies.

**Note:** If your node has been running without the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable set, the node automatically generates an encryption key and stores it in a file called `backup_encryption_key.hex` in your `$MPC_HOME` directory. You can retrieve it with:

```bash
export BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(cat $MPC_HOME/backup_encryption_key.hex)
```

Set this environment variable on both your old and new MPC nodes before proceeding:

```bash
export MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX=$BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY
```

## Step 4: Backup Keyshares from Old Node

Now backup the keyshares from your currently running node.

### Obtain Node Information

You'll need:
- **MPC node address**: The host:port where your node is running (e.g., `node.example.com:3000`)
- **MPC node P2P public key**: The Ed25519 public key used for P2P communication (found in your node's startup logs or configuration)

### Run the Backup

```bash
backup-cli \
  --home-dir $BACKUP_HOME_DIR \
  get-keyshares \
  --mpc-node-address node.example.com:3000 \
  --mpc-node-p2p-key "ed25519:YourNodeP2PPublicKey..." \
  --backup-encryption-key-hex $BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY

> ```

Reviewer: @copilot Before running this we need to get the contract state and write it to the $BACKUP_HOME_DIR/contract_state.json - can you add this to the instructions?

## Step 2: Register the Backup Service

Before you can backup keyshares, you must register your backup service's public key with the MPC contract.

### Get the Registration Command

Run the following command to generate the NEAR CLI command for registration:

```bash
backup-cli \
  --home-dir $BACKUP_HOME_DIR \
  register \
  --mpc-contract-account-id v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  --near-network testnet \
  --signer-account-id your-account.testnet
```

This will output a complete `near` CLI command. Example output:

```bash
Run the following command to register your backup service:

near contract call-function as-transaction \
  v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  register_backup_service \
  json-args '{"backup_service_info":{"public_key":"ed25519:AbC123..."}}' \
  prepaid-gas '300.0 Tgas' \
  attached-deposit '0 NEAR' \
  sign-as your-account.testnet \
  network-config testnet \
  sign-with-keychain \
  send
```

### Execute the Registration

Copy and run the generated command to register your backup service with the contract.

## Step 3: Generate and Set Encryption Key

> Generate a 256-bit (32-byte) AES encryption key for securing keyshares during backup and restore:

Reviewer 2: is this the same as local_storage_aes_key?  or another key?
if the same, then why do we need to regenerate it again?
if not the same, why do we need 2 keys?

```bash
# Generate a random 32-byte hex key
export BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(openssl rand -hex 32)
echo "Your encryption key: $BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY"
```

**Critical:** Save this encryption key securely. You'll need to provide it to:
1. Your **old MPC node** (via the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable)

> 2. Your **new MPC node** (via the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable)

Reviewer 2: not clear if MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX need to be the same on both old and new nodes

3. The **backup-cli** commands (via the `--backup-encryption-key-hex` parameter)

**Note:** If your node has been running without the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable set, the node automatically generates an encryption key and stores it in a file called `backup_encryption_key.hex` in your `$MPC_HOME` directory. You can retrieve it with:

```bash

> export BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(cat $MPC_HOME/backup_encryption_key.hex)

Reviewer 2: this is possible only on non TEE setups.
what is the flow when we want to migrate between 2 TEE setups?

```

Set this environment variable on both your old and new MPC nodes before proceeding:

```bash
export MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX=$BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY
```

## Step 4: Backup Keyshares from Old Node

Now backup the keyshares from your currently running node.

### Obtain Node Information

You'll need:

> - **MPC node address**: The host:port where your node is running (e.g., `node.example.com:3000`)

Reviewer 2: the migration port is not the TLS P2P port. but rather uses 8079

- `p2p_private_key`: Used for mutual TLS authentication with MPC nodes
- `local_storage_aes_key`: Used to encrypt keyshares stored locally

**Important:** Keep the `secrets.json` file secure. Anyone with access to this file and your encryption key can access your node's keyshares.

## Step 2: Register the Backup Service

Before you can backup keyshares, you must register your backup service's public key with the MPC contract.

### Get the Registration Command

Run the following command to generate the NEAR CLI command for registration:

```bash
backup-cli \
  --home-dir $BACKUP_HOME_DIR \
  register \
  --mpc-contract-account-id v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  --near-network testnet \
  --signer-account-id your-account.testnet
```

This will output a complete `near` CLI command. Example output:

```bash
Run the following command to register your backup service:

near contract call-function as-transaction \
  v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  register_backup_service \
  json-args '{"backup_service_info":{"public_key":"ed25519:AbC123..."}}' \
  prepaid-gas '300.0 Tgas' \
  attached-deposit '0 NEAR' \
  sign-as your-account.testnet \
  network-config testnet \
  sign-with-keychain \
  send
```

> 

Reviewer 2: @copilot 
 add a line explanation how to check the migration info on the contract:

something like this: (but use generic parameter as in the rest of the examples:  

 near contract call-function as-read-only mpc.mpc-local.test.near migration_info json-args {} network-config mpc-localnet now

output:
      migration_info
{
  "node0.mpc-local.test.near": [
    {
      "public_key": "ed25519:HJsrHbNZrgzDryckzfwneDDRy97gw9uZd61bUDEBaUgD"
    },

```

**Critical:** Save this encryption key securely. You'll need to provide it to:
1. Your **old MPC node** (via the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable)
2. Your **new MPC node** (via the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable)
3. The **backup-cli** commands (via the `--backup-encryption-key-hex` parameter)

**Important:** The `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` must be the **same** on both old and new nodes for the migration to work. This key provides an additional layer of security beyond mTLS for encrypting keyshares during transport.

**Note on key differences:** 
- `BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY` (this key) is used to encrypt keyshares during transport between nodes and the backup-cli
- `local_storage_aes_key` (from Step 1) is used to encrypt keyshares stored on disk in the backup home directory
- These are two different keys serving different purposes

**Note:** If your node has been running without the `MPC_BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY_HEX` environment variable set, the node automatically generates an encryption key and stores it in a file called `backup_encryption_key.hex` in your `$MPC_HOME_DIR` directory. You can retrieve it with:

```bash

> export BACKUP_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(cat $MPC_HOME_DIR/backup_encryption_key.hex)

Reviewer 2: note: from observation, this file is overwritten each boot (when using CVM), this is very problematic.

## Step 6: Initiate Migration in Contract

Call the `start_node_migration` method on the MPC contract to register the new node as the migration target:

```bash
near contract call-function as-transaction \
  v1.signer-prod.testnet \
  start_node_migration \
  json-args '{
    "destination_node_info": {
      "signer_account_pk": "ed25519:NewNodeSignerPublicKey...",
      "destination_node_info": {
        "url": "https://new-node.example.com:3000",
        "sign_pk": "ed25519:NewNodeP2PPublicKey..."
      }
    }
  }' \
  prepaid-gas '300.0 Tgas' \
  attached-deposit '0 NEAR' \
  sign-as your-account.testnet \
  network-config testnet \
  sign-with-keychain \
  send
```

**Note:** Replace the public keys and URL with your actual new node's values.

**Field Explanations:**
- `signer_account_pk`: The NEAR account public key (Ed25519) the new node will use to sign contract transactions
- `destination_node_info` (outer): The complete destination node information struct required by the contract
- `destination_node_info` (inner/nested): The participant information containing the node's URL and P2P signing key

> - `url`: The HTTP/HTTPS endpoint where the new node will be accessible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `url`: The DNS/IP endpoint where the new node will be accessible
```
